# Social support via Internet communication technology for diabetes self-management: a scoping review

**Authors:** Danielle Hazime, Elizabeth Burner  
**Year:** None  
**Journal:** mHealth  
**Volume:** 10  
**Pages:** 18-18  
**DOI:** 10.21037/mhealth-23-34  

## Abstract
Background: The global prevalence of diabetes has been increasing over the past 30 years, leading to a rise in complications; diabetes is the leading cause of amputations, blindness, and kidney failure in developed countries. Diabetes self-management is challenging due to the complex lifestyle changes required. Social support from family and friends plays a crucial role in overcoming barriers to healthy behavior choices. Integrating Internet and communication technologies with social support interventions has the potential to improve diabetes self-management.
Methods: A scoping review was conducted by searching PubMed, Ovid, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), and Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Digital Library databases for studies combining diabetes, Internet and communication technologies, and social support interventions. Inclusion criteria focused on adult patients with diabetes and primarily Internet and communication technologies-based strategies to initiate and enhance social support. Data abstraction included study population, design, outcomes, social support domains emphasized, support relationship intervention strategy, and Internet and communication technologies modality.
Results: The review identified 39 articles and 33 unique studies representing 27 unique interventions utilizing peer web forums, interactive voice recordings, messaging-based interventions (including Short Message Service and instant messaging), and email as Internet and communication technologies modalities. Various outcomes were reported, including improvements in perception of social support, psychosocial wellbeing, behavior changes, and clinical outcomes. Existing support relationships may be more effective in promoting behavior change and clinical outcomes compared to developing new relationships. Studies that explicitly measured patients’ perception of support consistently showed improvements in psycho-social, behavioral, and clinical outcomes.
Conclusions: This scoping review highlights the pivotal role of social support in diabetes selfmanagement. By integrating Internet and communication technologies into interventions, diverse modalities such as web forums and text messaging have shown promise in enhancing patients’ perception of support and improving psychosocial well-being, behavior changes, and clinical outcomes. The emphasis on leveraging existing support relationships, rather than establishing new ones, underscores the effectiveness of personalized, patient-centered approaches. These findings provide essential insights for healthcare strategies, emphasizing the need to harness technology and existing social networks to empower individuals in managing diabetes effectively.

