# Dose and engagement during an extended contact physical activity and dietary behavior change intervention delivered via tailored text messaging: exploring relationships with behavioral outcomes

**Authors:** Brianna S Fjeldsoe, Ana D Goode, Jennifer Job, Elizabeth G Eakin, Kate L Spilsbury, Elisabeth Winkler  
**Year:** None  
**Journal:** International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity  
**Volume:** 18  
**Issue:** 1  
**DOI:** 10.1186/s12966-021-01179-8  

## Abstract
Abstract                Background                Extended contact interventions delivered via text messaging are a low-cost option for promoting the long-term continuation of behavior change. This secondary analysis of a text message–delivered extended contact intervention (‘Get Healthy, Stay Healthy’ (GHSH)) explores the extent to which changes in physical activity, dietary behaviors and body weight were associated with the frequency of text messages (dose) and contact between the health coach and participant (engagement).                              Methods                Following a telephone coaching program, participants were randomised to receive extended contact via tailored text messages (GHSH, n = 114) or no additional contact (n = 114) over a 6-month period. Message dose, timing, and content were based on participant preferences, ascertained during two tailoring telephone calls. All incoming and outgoing messages were recorded. At baseline and 6 months, participants self-reported body weight and dietary behaviors (fruit and vegetable servings/day). Moderate-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) was assessed via accelerometry.                              Results                Median dose (25th, 75th percentile) was 53 (33, 72) text messages in total across six months. Mean fortnightly dose in weeks 1–2 was 5.5 (95 % CI: 4.3, 6.6) text messages, and remained stable (with the exception of planned decreases in weeks involving additional intervention contacts). Offset against the average fortnightly dose of goal checks (1.6, 95 % CI: 1.3, 2.0 and 1.5, 95 % CI: 1.2, 1.8, for physical activity and diet respectively), mean replies to goal checks were highest in weeks 1–2 (1.4, 95 % CI: 1.4, 1.5 and 1.3, 95 % CI: 1.2, 1.4, respectively) and tended to become lower in most weeks thereafter. Greater weight loss was positively associated with text message dose (P = 0.022), with a difference of 1.9 kg between participants receiving the most and fewest texts. There was no association between engagement and changes in outcome measures.                              Conclusions                A fixed dose of texts does not seem suitable to meet participants’ individual preferences. Higher self-selected text doses predicted better weight outcomes. However, greater participant engagement through text replies does not predict more favourable outcomes, despite being a suggested facilitator of successful behavior change maintenance.                              Trial registration                Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry number: ACTRN12613000949785. Date registered: 27 August 2013. Retrospectively registered. http://www.anzctr.org.au/.

