# Enhancing tuberculosis treatment adherence and motivation through gamified real-time mobile app utilization: a single-arm intervention study

**Authors:** Siti Aishah Abas, Nurhuda Ismail, Yuslina Zakaria, Siti Munira Yasin, Khalid Ibrahim, Ismassabah Ismail, Asmah Razali, Mas Ahmad Sherzkawi, Norliza Ahmad  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** BMC Public Health  
**Volume:** 24  
**Issue:** 1  
**DOI:** 10.1186/s12889-023-17561-z  

## Abstract
Abstract                Background                Finding innovative methods to enhance Tuberculosis treatment adherence in Malaysia is imperative, given the rising trend of non-adhere TB patients. Direct Observed Therapy (DOTS) has been used to ensure Tuberculosis (TB) drug compliance worldwide. However, due to its inconvenience, digitalizing this system into a virtual monitoring system via a mobile app can help deliver a more efficient tuberculosis management system. A gamified video-observed therapy is developed that connects three users the patient, supervisor, and administrator, allowing drug monitoring and patient loss to follow up with the patient tracking system. Thus, the objective of this study is to determine the impact of Gamified Real-time Video Observed Therapy (GRVOTS) mobile apps on patient medication adherence rates and motivation.                              Methods                71 patients from 18 facilities participated in the 8-week single-arm intervention study. GRVOTS mobile apps were installed in their mobile apps, and patients were expected to fulfill tasks such as providing Video Direct Observe Therapy (VDOTS) daily as well as side effect reporting. At 3-time intervals of baseline,1-month, and 2-month intervals, the number of VDOT taken, the Malaysian Medication Adherence Assessment Tool (MyMAAT), and the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) questionnaire were collected. One-sample t-test was conducted comparing the VDOT video adherence to the standard rate of 80%. RM ANOVA was used to analyze any significant differences in MyMAAT and IMI scores across three-time intervals.                              Results                This study involved 71 numbers of patients from 18 healthcare facilities who showed a significantly higher treatment adherence score of 90.87% than a standard score of 80% with a mean difference of 10.87(95% CI: 7.29,14.46; p < 0.001). The participants’ MyMAAT and IMI scores significantly increased over 3-time intervals with the IMI Interest domain showing the highest mean difference 19.76 (95% CI: 16.37, 21.152: p < 0.001).                              Conclusions                By utilizing GRVOTS, a mobile application based on gamification and real-time features, we can enhance motivation and medication adherence among TB patients, while also addressing the limitations of physical DOTS.                              Trial registration                IRCT20230308057657N1, Registered on (15/03/23).

