# A systematic review and network meta-analysis of pharmaceutical interventions used to manage chronic pain

**Authors:** Ashish Shetty, Gayathri Delanerolle, Heitor Cavalini, Chunli Deng, Xiaojie Yang, Amy Boyd, Tacson Fernandez, Peter Phiri, Arun Bhaskar, Jian Qing Shi  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** Scientific Reports  
**Volume:** 14  
**Issue:** 1  
**DOI:** 10.1038/s41598-023-49761-3  

## Abstract
AbstractIt is estimated 1.5 billion of the global population suffer from chronic pain with prevalence increasing with demographics including age. It is suggested long-term exposure to chronic could cause further health challenges reducing people’s quality of life. Therefore, it is imperative to use effective treatment options. We explored the current pharmaceutical treatments available for chronic pain management to better understand drug efficacy and pain reduction. A systematic methodology was developed and published in PROSPERO (CRD42021235384). Keywords of opioids, acute pain, pain management, chronic pain, opiods, NSAIDs, and analgesics were used across PubMed, Science direct, ProQuest, Web of science, Ovid Psych INFO, PROSPERO, EBSCOhost, MEDLINE, ClinicalTrials.gov and EMBASE. All randomised controlled clinical trials (RCTs), epidemiology and mixed-methods studies published in English between the 1st of January 1990 and 30th of April 2022 were included. A total of 119 studies were included. The data was synthesised using a tri-partied statistical methodology of a meta-analysis (24), pairwise meta-analysis (24) and network meta-analysis (34). Mean, median, standard deviation and confidence intervals for various pain assessments were used as the main outcomes for pre-treatment pain scores at baseline, post-treatment pain scores and pain score changes of each group. Our meta-analysis revealed the significant reduction in chronic pain scores of patients taking NSAID versus non-steroidal opioid drugs was comparative to patients given placebo under a random effects model. Pooled evidence also indicated significant drug efficiency with Botulinum Toxin Type-A (BTX-A) and Ketamine. Chronic pain is a public health problem that requires far more effective pharmaceutical interventions with minimal better side-effect profiles which will aid to develop better clinical guidelines. The importance of understanding ubiquity of pain by clinicians, policy makers, researchers and academic scholars is vital to prevent social determinant which aggravates issue.

