# Collection of Common Knee Patient-reported Outcome Instruments by Automated Mobile Phone Text Messaging in Pediatric Sports Medicine.

**Authors:** Xochitl Mellor, Matthew J. Buczek, Alexander J. Adams, J. Todd R. Lawrence, Theodore J. Ganley, Apurva S. Shah  
**Year:** 2020  
**Journal:** Journal of Pediatric Orthopaedics  
**Volume:** 40  
**Issue:** 2  
**DOI:** 10.1097/bpo.0000000000001403  

## Abstract
BACKGROUND: Patient-reported outcome (PRO) instruments measure health status in a variety of domains. With the proliferation of mobile phones, delivering PROs across patient-friendly platforms (eg, apps, text messaging) may increase completion rates, particularly among children. The purpose of this study was to validate the collection of common knee PROs in sports medicine with text messaging by correlating text-messaging responses with paper delivery in adolescents. METHODS: Patients presenting to a hospital-based pediatric orthopaedic sports medicine clinic with a knee injury were enrolled prospectively. Paper versions of the Pediatric International Knee Documentation Committee (Pedi-IKDC) Subjective Knee Evaluation Form and the Pediatric Functional Activity Brief Scale (Pedi-Fab Scale) were completed during initial clinic visits. Over the next 72 hours, patients completed the text message delivery of the Pedi-IKDC and Pedi-Fab Scale. Correlations between paper and text message delivery of the 2 PROs were assessed. RESULTS: Ninety-one patients (mean age: 16.0+/-2.0 y; 48% females) enrolled in the text-messaging study, with 55 (60.4%) completing the Pedi-Fab Scale, 48 (52.7%) completing the Pedi-IKDC, and 39 (42.9%) completing both PROs. The intraclass correlation coefficient between the paper and mobile phone delivery of the Pedi-Fab Scale was 0.95 (P<0.001; 95% confidence interval, 0.91-0.97). The intraclass correlation coefficient between the paper and mobile phone delivery of the Pedi-IKDC was 0.96 (P<0.001; 95% confidence interval, 0.93-0.98). Average Pedi-Fab scores on paper (M=12.7) and mobile phone (M=12.3) were not significantly different (P=0.52). Similarly, average Pedi-IKDC scores on paper (M=68.8) and mobile phone (M=67.7) were not significantly different (P=0.41). Average completion time for the text delivered Pedi-Fab and Pedi-IKDC were 102+/-224 and 159+/-155 minutes, respectively. High school enrollment (P=0.025), female sex (P=0.036), and race (P=0.002) were significantly associated with text completion of Pedi-IKDC. CONCLUSIONS: Text message delivery using mobile phones permits valid assessment of Pedi-IKDC and Pedi-Fab scores in adolescents. Questionnaire delivery by automated text messaging allows asynchronous response and may increase compliance and reduce the labor cost of collecting PROs. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level III-prospective cohort study.

