# Digital Phenotyping for Stress, Anxiety, and Mild Depression: Systematic Literature Review

**Authors:** Adrien Choi, Aysel Ooi, Danielle Lottridge  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** JMIR mHealth and uHealth  
**Volume:** 12  
**Pages:** e40689  
**DOI:** 10.2196/40689  

## Abstract
Background            Unaddressed early-stage mental health issues, including stress, anxiety, and mild depression, can become a burden for individuals in the long term. Digital phenotyping involves capturing continuous behavioral data via digital smartphone devices to monitor human behavior and can potentially identify milder symptoms before they become serious.                                Objective            This systematic literature review aimed to answer the following questions: (1) what is the evidence of the effectiveness of digital phenotyping using smartphones in identifying behavioral patterns related to stress, anxiety, and mild depression? and (2) in particular, which smartphone sensors are found to be effective, and what are the associated challenges?                                Methods            We used the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) process to identify 36 papers (reporting on 40 studies) to assess the key smartphone sensors related to stress, anxiety, and mild depression. We excluded studies conducted with nonadult participants (eg, teenagers and children) and clinical populations, as well as personality measurement and phobia studies. As we focused on the effectiveness of digital phenotyping using smartphones, results related to wearable devices were excluded.                                Results            We categorized the studies into 3 major groups based on the recruited participants: studies with students enrolled in universities, studies with adults who were unaffiliated to any particular organization, and studies with employees employed in an organization. The study length varied from 10 days to 3 years. A range of passive sensors were used in the studies, including GPS, Bluetooth, accelerometer, microphone, illuminance, gyroscope, and Wi-Fi. These were used to assess locations visited; mobility; speech patterns; phone use, such as screen checking; time spent in bed; physical activity; sleep; and aspects of social interactions, such as the number of interactions and response time. Of the 40 included studies, 31 (78%) used machine learning models for prediction; most others (n=8, 20%) used descriptive statistics. Students and adults who experienced stress, anxiety, or depression visited fewer locations, were more sedentary, had irregular sleep, and accrued increased phone use. In contrast to students and adults, less mobility was seen as positive for employees because less mobility in workplaces was associated with higher performance. Overall, travel, physical activity, sleep, social interaction, and phone use were related to stress, anxiety, and mild depression.                                Conclusions            This study focused on understanding whether smartphone sensors can be effectively used to detect behavioral patterns associated with stress, anxiety, and mild depression in nonclinical participants. The reviewed studies provided evidence that smartphone sensors are effective in identifying behavioral patterns associated with stress, anxiety, and mild depression.

