# Acceptance and Commitment Therapy Delivered via a Mobile Phone Messaging Robot to Decrease Postoperative Opioid Use in Patients With Orthopedic Trauma: Randomized Controlled Trial

**Authors:** Chris A. Anthony, Edward O Rojas, Valerie J. Keffala, Natalie A. Glass, Apurva S. Shah, Benjamin J. Miller, Matthew Hogue, Michael C. Willey, Matthew D. Karam, J. L. Marsh  
**Year:** 2020  
**Journal:** Journal of Medical Internet Research  
**Volume:** 22  
**Issue:** 7  
**Pages:** 17750  
**DOI:** 10.2196/17750  

## Abstract
BACKGROUND Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is a pragmatic approach to help individuals decrease avoidable pain. OBJECTIVE This study aims to evaluate the effects of ACT delivered via an automated mobile messaging robot on postoperative opioid use and patient-reported outcomes (PROs) in patients with orthopedic trauma who underwent operative intervention for their injuries. METHODS Adult patients presenting to a level 1 trauma center who underwent operative fixation of a traumatic upper or lower extremity fracture and who used mobile phone text messaging were eligible for the study. Patients were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to either the intervention group, who received twice-daily mobile phone messages communicating an ACT-based intervention for the first 2 weeks after surgery, or the control group, who received no messages. Baseline PROs were completed. Two weeks after the operative intervention, follow-up was performed in the form of an opioid medication pill count and postoperative administration of PROs. The mean number of opioid tablets used by patients was calculated and compared between groups. The mean PRO scores were also compared between the groups. RESULTS A total of 82 subjects were enrolled in the study. Of the 82 participants, 76 (38 ACT and 38 controls) completed the study. No differences between groups in demographic factors were identified. The intervention group used an average of 26.1 (SD 21.4) opioid tablets, whereas the control group used 41.1 (SD 22.0) tablets, resulting in 36.5% ([41.1-26.1]/41.1) less tablets used by subjects receiving the mobile phone-based ACT intervention (P=.004). The intervention group subjects reported a lower postoperative Patient-Reported Outcome Measure Information System Pain Intensity score (mean 45.9, SD 7.2) than control group subjects (mean 49.7, SD 8.8; P=.04). CONCLUSIONS In this study, the delivery of an ACT-based intervention via an automated mobile messaging robot in the acute postoperative period decreased opioid use in selected patients with orthopedic trauma. Participants receiving the ACT-based intervention also reported lower pain intensity after 2 weeks, although this may not represent a clinically important difference. TRIAL REGISTRATION ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03991546; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03991546.

