# The Associations Between Seven Different Types of Physical Activity and the Incidence of Fracture at Seven Sites in Healthy Postmenopausal UK Women

**Authors:** Miranda Eg Armstrong, Jason Lacombe, Clare J Wotton, Benjamin J Cairns, Jane Green, Sarah Floud, Valerie Beral, Gillian K Reeves  
**Year:** 2020  
**Journal:** Journal of Bone and Mineral Research  
**Volume:** 35  
**Issue:** 2  
**Pages:** 277-290  
**DOI:** 10.1002/jbmr.3896  

## Abstract
There is a paucity of information on associations between speciﬁc types of physical activity and fracture risk at different sites in otherwise healthy postmenopausal women. Therefore, we examined risk of fracture at seven different sites associated with seven different types of physical activity in the population-based prospective UK Million Women Study. A total of 371,279 postmenopausal women (mean age 59.8 years), rating their health as good or excellent and reporting participation in walking, cycling, gardening, doing housework, yoga, dance, and sports club activities, were followed for site-speciﬁc incident fracture through record linkage to national databases on day-case and overnight hospital admissions. Cox regression yielded adjusted relative risks (RRs) and, because of the large number of statistical tests done, 99% conﬁdence intervals (CIs) for fracture at seven different sites in relation to seven different physical activities. During an average follow-up of 12 years, numbers with a ﬁrst site-speciﬁc fracture were as follows: humerus (2341), forearm (1238), wrist (7358), hip (4354), femur (not neck) (617), lower leg (1184), and ankle (3629). For upper limb fractures there was signiﬁcant heterogeneity across the seven activity types (test for heterogeneity p = 0.004), with gardening more than 1 hour/week associated with a lower risk (RR = 0.91; 99% CI, 0.86 to 0.96; p < 0.0001), whereas cycling more than 1 hour/ week was associated with an increased risk (RR = 1.11; 99% CI, 1.00 to 1.23; p = 0.008). For fractures of the lower limb (including hip) there was no signiﬁcant heterogeneity by type of activity, with signiﬁcant approximately 5% to 15% reductions in risk associated with most activities, except cycling. For hip fractures, there was no signiﬁcant heterogeneity by type of activity, but with signiﬁcant 15% to 20% reductions in risk associated with walking for 1 hour/day and participating in yoga and sporting activities. Physical activity is a modiﬁable risk factor for fracture, but the effects differ between different types of activities and different fracture sites. © 2019 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published by American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

