# Text message questionnaires for Patient-Reported Outcome Measures after Cesarean section—A feasibility study

**Authors:** Patricia Duch, Christoffer Calov Jørgensen, Helene Korvenius Nedergaard  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica  
**Volume:** 68  
**Issue:** 9  
**Pages:** 1254-1260  
**DOI:** 10.1111/aas.14477  

## Abstract
Background Inadequate pain relief with moderate to severe pain remains a challenge after cesarean section and may significantly impair postoperative recovery. However, detailed assessment on the timing of severe pain, opioid consumption, influence on activities such as mobilization, breastfeeding, and caring for the infant are difficult to conduct, especially after discharge. Short message services (SMS)-based questionnaires may offer a low-cost way of providing such data but with the risk of insufficient response rates. We assessed the feasibility of collecting detailed, prospective data on postoperative pain and recovery during the initial hours and days following cesarean section using SMS-based questionnaires. Methods Prospective Danish single-center cohort study involving elective cesarean sections under spinal anesthesia with fentanyl and bupivacaine. The postoperative pain regimen consisted of paracetamol, NSAID and oral morphine by request. Patients received an SMS-based questionnaire at 6, 12, 18, 24, and 48 h postoperatively, as well as on days 7 and 30. Primary outcome: Response rate and time from receiving the SMS to completion of the questionnaires. Secondary outcomes: Opioid consumption and Patient Reported Outcomes Measures on pain and recovery. Results From December 2022 to June 2023; 100 patients were included. The response rate was 78% at 6 h postoperatively, decreasing to 63% at 24 h. The median response time from receiving to answering the SMS-based questionnaire at 6 h after cesarean section was 23 min (IQR 2–72), decreasing to 20 min (IQR 2–78) after 24 h. Severe pain, corresponding to a Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) score >6, was reported by 57% (95% CI 65–84) at 6 h, decreasing to 28% (95% CI 34–58) at 24 h. Median opioid consumption within the first 24 h was 30 mg (IQR 20–50). Conclusion SMS-based questionnaires on Patient Reported Outcome Measures are a feasible and cost-effective way of prospectively collecting frequent data with acceptable response rates, even shortly after cesarean section. Secondarily 66% of patients reported severe pain during the first 24 h following cesarean section, with the highest pain scores within the initial 12 h. Future studies should focus on optimizing pain-management within this timeframe.

