# Sustained Long-Term Efficacy of Motivational Counseling and Text Message Reminders on Daily Sitting Time in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis: Long-Term Follow-up of a Randomized, Parallel-Group Trial

**Authors:** Tanja Thomsen, Mette Aadahl, Nina Beyer, Merete L. Hetland, Katrine B. Løppenthin, Julie Midtgaard, Robin Christensen, Sabrina M. Nielsen, Mikkel Østergaard, Poul Jennum, Bente A. Esbensen  
**Year:** 2020  
**Journal:** Arthritis Care & Research  
**Volume:** 72  
**Issue:** 11  
**Pages:** 1560-1570  
**DOI:** 10.1002/acr.24060  

## Abstract
Objective To evaluate the 18-month postintervention efficacy following a 4-month individually tailored behavioral intervention on daily sitting time in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Methods In an observer-blinded randomized trial, 150 RA patients were included. During 4 months, the intervention group (n = 75) received 3 motivational counseling sessions and tailored text messages aimed at increasing light-intensity physical activity through reduction of sedentary behavior. The control group (n = 75) maintained their usual lifestyle. The primary outcome was change from baseline to 18 months postintervention in objectively measured daily sitting time (using ActivPAL). Secondary outcomes included changes in clinical patient-reported outcomes and cardiometabolic biomarkers. A mixed-effect repeated measures analysis of covariance model in the intent-to-treat population was applied. Results At 22 months follow-up from baseline, 12 participants were lost to follow-up. Compared to baseline, sitting time in the intervention group decreased 1.10 hours/day, whereas it increased by 1.32 hours/day in the control group, a between-group difference of –2.43 hours/day (95% confidence interval [95% CI] –2.99, –1.86; P < 0.0001) favoring the intervention group. For most secondary outcomes, between-group differences favored the intervention: visual analog scale (VAS) pain –15.51 mm (95% CI –23.42, –7.60), VAS fatigue –12.30 mm (95% CI –20.71, –3.88), physical function –0.39 Health Assessment Questionnaire units (95% CI –0.53, –0.26), total cholesterol –0.86 mmoles/liter (95% CI –1.03, –0.68), triglycerides –0.26 mmoles/liter (95% CI –0.43, –0.09), and average glucose –1.15 mmoles/liter (95% CI –1.39, –0.91). Conclusion The 4-month postintervention results showed that patients in the intervention reduced their daily sitting time and improved patient-reported outcomes and total cholesterol levels compared to the control group. Eighteen months after intervention, patients in the intervention group were still significantly less sedentary than controls. Findings suggest that a behavioral approach is beneficial for promoting long-term physical activity and health in patients with RA.

