# Effectiveness of eHealth Interventions in Improving Medication Adherence Among Patients With Cardiovascular Disease: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

**Authors:** Yiqun Miao, Yuan Luo, Yuhan Zhao, Mingxuan Liu, Huiying Wang, Ying Wu  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** Journal of Medical Internet Research  
**Volume:** 26  
**Pages:** e58013  
**DOI:** 10.2196/58013  

## Abstract
Background            Nonadherence to medication among patients with cardiovascular diseases undermines the desired therapeutic outcomes. eHealth interventions emerge as promising strategies to effectively tackle this issue.                                Objective            The aim of this study was to conduct a network meta-analysis (NMA) to compare and rank the efficacy of various eHealth interventions in improving medication adherence among patients with cardiovascular diseases (CVDs).                                Methods            A systematic search strategy was conducted in PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane, China National Knowledge Infrastructure Library (CNKI), China Science and Technology Journal Database (Weipu), and WanFang databases to search for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) published from their inception on January 15, 2024. We carried out a frequentist NMA to compare the efficacy of various eHealth interventions. The quality of the literature was assessed using the risk of bias tool from the Cochrane Handbook (version 2.0), and extracted data were analyzed using Stata16.0 (StataCorp LLC) and RevMan5.4 software (Cochrane Collaboration). The certainty of evidence was evaluated using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) approach.                                Results            A total of 21 RCTs involving 3904 patients were enrolled. The NMA revealed that combined interventions (standardized mean difference [SMD] 0.89, 95% CI 0.22-1.57), telephone support (SMD 0.68, 95% CI 0.02-1.33), telemonitoring interventions (SMD 0.70, 95% CI 0.02-1.39), and mobile phone app interventions (SMD 0.65, 95% CI 0.01-1.30) were statistically superior to usual care. However, SMS compared to usual care showed no statistical difference. Notably, the combined intervention, with a surface under the cumulative ranking curve of 79.3%, appeared to be the most effective option for patients with CVDs. Regarding systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure outcomes, the combined intervention also had the highest probability of being the best intervention.                                Conclusions            The research indicates that the combined intervention (SMS text messaging and telephone support) has the greatest likelihood of being the most effective eHealth intervention to improve medication adherence in patients with CVDs, followed by telemonitoring, telephone support, and app interventions. The results of these network meta-analyses can provide crucial evidence-based support for health care providers to enhance patients’ medication adherence. Given the differences in the design and implementation of eHealth interventions, further large-scale, well-designed multicenter trials are needed.                                Trial Registration            INPLASY 2023120063; https://inplasy.com/inplasy-2023-12-0063/

