# A Personalized Mobile Cessation Intervention to Promote Smokers From the Preparation Stage to the Action Stage: Double-blind Randomized Controlled Trial

**Authors:** Haoxiang Lin, Ying Wang, Yanling Xing, Yinglian Han, Chengqian Zhang, Ting Luo, Chun Chang  
**Year:** 2023  
**Journal:** Journal of Medical Internet Research  
**Volume:** 25  
**Pages:** e41911  
**DOI:** 10.2196/41911  

## Abstract
Background            Most mobile cessation studies have found that such interventions have a higher quitting rate than interventions providing minimal smoking cessation support. However, why such interventions are effective has been almost unstudied by researchers.                                Objective            This paper describes the principles of the personalized mobile cessation intervention-based WeChat app and used generalized estimated equations to assess why a personalized mobile cessation intervention was more likely to promote smokers from the preparation stage to the action stage than a nonpersonalized intervention.                                Methods            This is a 2-arm, double-blind, randomized controlled trial in five cities in China. The intervention group received a personalized mobile cessation intervention. The control group received a nonpersonalized SMS text message smoking cessation intervention. All information was sent by the WeChat app. The outcomes were the change in protection motivation theory construct scores and the change in transtheoretical model stages.                                Results            A total of 722 participants were randomly assigned to the intervention or control group. Compared with those who received the nonpersonalized SMS text message intervention, smokers who received the personalized intervention presented lower intrinsic rewards, extrinsic rewards, and response costs. Intrinsic rewards were determinants of stage change, thus explaining why the intervention group was more likely to promote smokers from the preparation stage to the action stage (odds ratio 2.65, 95% CI 1.41-4.98).                                Conclusions            This study identified the psychological determinants at different stages to facilitate smokers moving forward to the next stage of quitting behavior and provides a framework to explore why a smoking cessation intervention is effective.                                Trial Registration            Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ChiCTR2100041942; https://tinyurl.com/2hhx4m7f

