# User Engagement With mHealth Interventions to Promote Treatment Adherence and Self-Management in People With Chronic Health Conditions: Systematic Review

**Authors:** Cyd Eaton, Natalie Vallejo, Xiomara McDonald, Jasmine Wu, Rosa Rodríguez, Nishanth Muthusamy, Nestoras Mathioudakis, Kristin A Riekert  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** Journal of Medical Internet Research  
**Volume:** 26  
**Pages:** e50508  
**DOI:** 10.2196/50508  

## Abstract
Background            There are numerous mobile health (mHealth) interventions for treatment adherence and self-management; yet, little is known about user engagement or interaction with these technologies.                                Objective            This systematic review aimed to answer the following questions: (1) How is user engagement defined and measured in studies of mHealth interventions to promote adherence to prescribed medical or health regimens or self-management among people living with a health condition? (2) To what degree are patients engaging with these mHealth interventions? (3) What is the association between user engagement with mHealth interventions and adherence or self-management outcomes? (4) How often is user engagement a research end point?                                Methods            Scientific database (Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, PsycINFO, and CINAHL) search results (2016-2021) were screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria. Data were extracted in a standardized electronic form. No risk-of-bias assessment was conducted because this review aimed to characterize user engagement measurement rather than certainty in primary study results. The results were synthesized descriptively and thematically.                                Results            A total of 292 studies were included for data extraction. The median number of participants per study was 77 (IQR 34-164). Most of the mHealth interventions were evaluated in nonrandomized studies (157/292, 53.8%), involved people with diabetes (51/292, 17.5%), targeted medication adherence (98/292, 33.6%), and comprised apps (220/292, 75.3%). The principal findings were as follows: (1) >60 unique terms were used to define user engagement; “use” (102/292, 34.9%) and “engagement” (94/292, 32.2%) were the most common; (2) a total of 11 distinct user engagement measurement approaches were identified; the use of objective user log-in data from an app or web portal (160/292, 54.8%) was the most common; (3) although engagement was inconsistently evaluated, most of the studies (99/195, 50.8%) reported >1 level of engagement due to the use of multiple measurement methods or analyses, decreased engagement across time (76/99, 77%), and results and conclusions suggesting that higher engagement was associated with positive adherence or self-management (60/103, 58.3%); and (4) user engagement was a research end point in only 19.2% (56/292) of the studies.                                Conclusions            The results revealed major limitations in the literature reviewed, including significant variability in how user engagement is defined, a tendency to rely on user log-in data over other measurements, and critical gaps in how user engagement is evaluated (infrequently evaluated over time or in relation to adherence or self-management outcomes and rarely considered a research end point). Recommendations are outlined in response to our findings with the goal of improving research rigor in this area.                                Trial Registration            PROSPERO International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews CRD42022289693; https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42022289693

