# HealthySMS Text Messaging System Adjunct to Adolescent Group Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in the Context of COVID-19 (Let’s Text!): Pilot Feasibility and Acceptability Study

**Authors:** Lauren M Haack, Courtney C Armstrong, Kate Travis, Adrian Aguilera, Sabrina M Darrow  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** JMIR Mental Health  
**Volume:** 11  
**Pages:** e49317  
**DOI:** 10.2196/49317  

## Abstract
Background            The widespread occurrence and devastating impact of adolescent depression warrant health service research focused on feasible and acceptable digital health tools to supplement evidence-based intervention (EBI) efforts, particularly in the context of shelter-in-place guidelines disrupting youth socialization and service use in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. Given the promise of SMS text message interventions to enhance EBI engagement, our team developed the HealthySMS system as an adjunct to one of the most empirically supported interventions for adolescent depression: cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) group services. The system sends daily SMS text messages requesting responses assessing mood, thoughts, and activities; weekly attendance reminder messages; daily tips about adherence (eg, a prompt for activity completion); and personalized responses based on participants’ texts.                                Objective            This study aims to evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of HealthySMS in a real-world setting and explore potential mechanisms of change in EBI engagement, before evaluating the system’s impact on adolescents’ group CBT engagement and, ultimately, depression outcomes.                                Methods            Over the course of 2020, we invited all 20 adolescents receiving CBT group services for depression at an outpatient psychiatry clinic to enroll in our HealthySMS study; ultimately, 17 (85%) adolescents agreed to participate. We tracked participant initiation and engagement with the HealthySMS system as well as the content of SMS text message responses to HealthySMS. We also invited each participant to engage in a semistructured interview to gather additional qualitative inputs on the system.                                Results            All (n=17, 100%) research participants invited agreed to receive HealthySMS messages, and 94% (16/17) of the participants maintained use during the first month without opting out. We uncovered meaningful qualitative themes regarding the feasibility and acceptability of HealthySMS, as well as its potential impact on EBI engagement.                                Conclusions            Taken together, the results of this pilot study suggest that HealthySMS adjunct to adolescent CBT group depression services is feasible and acceptable, as evidenced by high rates of HealthySMS initiation and low rates of dropout, as well as meaningful themes uncovered from participants’ qualitative feedback. In addition, the findings provide evidence regarding iterative improvements to the HealthySMS system and research protocol, as well as potential mechanisms of change for enhanced EBI engagement and, ultimately, adolescent depression outcomes, which can be used in future effectiveness research.

