# Effectiveness of mHealth on Adherence to Antiretroviral Therapy in Patients Living With HIV: Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials

**Authors:** Liang Sun, Mengbing Qu, Bing Chen, Chuancang Li, Haohao Fan, Yang Zhao  
**Year:** 2023  
**Journal:** JMIR mHealth and uHealth  
**Volume:** 11  
**Pages:** e42799  
**DOI:** 10.2196/42799  

## Abstract
Background            The World Health Organization recommends that all adults with HIV adhere to antiretroviral therapy (ART). Good adherence to ART is beneficial to patients and the public. Furthermore, mHealth has shown promise in improving HIV medication adherence globally.                                Objective            The aim of this meta-analysis is to analyze the effectiveness of mHealth on adherence to antiretroviral therapy in patients living with HIV.                                Methods            Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of the association between mHealth and adherence to ART published until December 2021 were searched in electronic databases. Odds ratios (ORs), weighted mean differences, and 95% CIs were calculated. This meta-analysis was performed using the Mantel-Haenszel method or the inverse variance test. We evaluated heterogeneity with the I2 statistic. If I2 was ≤50%, heterogeneity was absent, and a fixed effect model was used. If I2 was >50%, heterogeneity was present, and a random effects model was used.                                Results            A total of 2163 participants in 8 studies were included in this meta-analysis. All included studies were RCTs. The random effects model was used for a meta-analysis of the effects of various intervention measures compared to routine nursing; the outcome was not statistically significant (OR 1.54, 95% CI 0.99-2.38; P=.05). In the subgroups, only short messaging service (SMS)-based interventions significantly increased adherence to ART (OR 1.76, 95% CI 1.07-2.89; P=.03). Further analysis showed that only interactive or bidirectional SMS could significantly increase ART adherence (OR 1.69, 95% CI 1.22-2.34; P=.001). After combining the difference in CD4 cell count before and after the interventions, we concluded that there was no statistical heterogeneity among the studies (I2=0%; tau2=0.37; P=.95).                                Conclusions            Interactive or bidirectional SMS can enhance intervention effects. However, whether mHealth can improve adherence to ART in patients with HIV needs further study. Owing to a lack of the required significant staff time, training, and ongoing supervision, there is still much more to do to apply mHealth to the clinical use of ART for patients living with HIV.                                Trial Registration            PROSPERO CRD42022358774; https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?RecordID=358774

