# Identifying Game-Based Digital Biomarkers of Cognitive Risk for Adolescent Substance Misuse: Protocol for a Proof-of-Concept Study

**Authors:** Kammarauche Aneni, Ching-Hua Chen, Jenny Meyer, Youngsun T Cho, Zachary Chase Lipton, Saatvik Kher, Megan G Jiao, Isabella Gomati De La Vega, Feza Anaise Umutoni, Robert A McDougal, Lynn E Fiellin  
**Year:** 2023  
**Journal:** JMIR Research Protocols  
**Volume:** 12  
**Pages:** e46990  
**DOI:** 10.2196/46990  

## Abstract
Background            Adolescents at risk for substance misuse are rarely identified early due to existing barriers to screening that include the lack of time and privacy in clinic settings. Games can be used for screening and thus mitigate these barriers. Performance in a game is influenced by cognitive processes such as working memory and inhibitory control. Deficits in these cognitive processes can increase the risk of substance use. Further, substance misuse affects these cognitive processes and may influence game performance, captured by in-game metrics such as reaction time or time for task completion. Digital biomarkers are measures generated from digital tools that explain underlying health processes and can be used to predict, identify, and monitor health outcomes. As such, in-game performance metrics may represent digital biomarkers of cognitive processes that can offer an objective method for assessing underlying risk for substance misuse.                                Objective            This is a protocol for a proof-of-concept study to investigate the utility of in-game performance metrics as digital biomarkers of cognitive processes implicated in the development of substance misuse.                                Methods            This study has 2 aims. In aim 1, using previously collected data from 166 adolescents aged 11-14 years, we extracted in-game performance metrics from a video game and are using machine learning methods to determine whether these metrics predict substance misuse. The extraction of in-game performance metrics was guided by literature review of in-game performance metrics and gameplay guidebooks provided by the game developers. In aim 2, using data from a new sample of 30 adolescents playing the same video game, we will test if metrics identified in aim 1 correlate with cognitive processes. Our hypothesis is that in-game performance metrics that are predictive of substance misuse in aim 1 will correlate with poor cognitive function in our second sample.                                Results            This study was funded by National Institute on Drug Abuse through the Center for Technology and Behavioral Health Pilot Core in May 2022. To date, we have extracted 285 in-game performance metrics. We obtained institutional review board approval on October 11, 2022. Data collection for aim 2 is ongoing and projected to end in February 2024. Currently, we have enrolled 12 participants. Data analysis for aim 2 will begin once data collection is completed. The results from both aims will be reported in a subsequent publication, expected to be published in late 2024.                                Conclusions            Screening adolescents for substance use is not consistently done due to barriers that include the lack of time. Using games that provide an objective measure to identify adolescents at risk for substance misuse can increase screening rates, early identification, and intervention. The results will inform the utility of in-game performance metrics as digital biomarkers for identifying adolescents at high risk for substance misuse.                                International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID)            DERR1-10.2196/46990

