# Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a 12-month automated text message intervention for weight management in postpartum women with overweight or obesity: protocol for the Supporting MumS (SMS) multisite, parallel-group, randomised controlled trial

**Authors:** Dunla Gallagher, Eleni Spyreli, Annie S Anderson, Sally Bridges, Christopher R Cardwell, Elinor Coulman, Stephan U Dombrowski, Caroline Free, Suzie Heaney, Pat Hoddinott, Frank Kee, Clíona McDowell, Emma McIntosh, Jayne V Woodside, Michelle C McKinley  
**Year:** None  
**Journal:** BMJ Open  
**Volume:** 14  
**Issue:** 5  
**Pages:** e084075  
**DOI:** 10.1136/bmjopen-2024-084075  

## Abstract
IntroductionThe reproductive years can increase women’s weight-related risk. Evidence for effective postpartum weight management interventions is lacking and engaging women during this life stage is challenging. Following a promising pilot evaluation of the Supporting MumS intervention, we assess if theory-based and bidirectional text messages to support diet and physical activity behaviour change for weight loss and weight loss maintenance, are effective and cost-effective for weight change in postpartum women with overweight or obesity, compared with an active control arm receiving text messages on child health and development.Methods and analysisTwo-arm, parallel-group, assessor-blind randomised controlled trial with cost-effectiveness and process evaluations. Women (n=888) with body mass index (BMI) ≥25 kg/m2and within 24 months of giving birth were recruited via community and National Health Service pathways through five UK sites targeting areas of ethnic and socioeconomic diversity. Women were 1:1 randomised to the intervention or active control groups, each receiving automated text messages for 12 months. Data are collected at 0, 6, 12 and 24 months. The primary outcome is weight change at 12 months from baseline, compared between groups. Secondary outcomes include weight change (24 months) and waist circumference (cm), proportional weight gain (>5 kg), BMI (kg/m2), dietary intake, physical activity, infant feeding and mental health (6, 12 and 24 months, respectively). Economic evaluation examines health service usage and personal expenditure, health-related quality of life and capability well-being to assess cost-effectiveness over the trial and modelled lifetime. Cost–utility analysis examines cost per quality-adjusted life-years gained over 24 months. Mixed-method process evaluation explores participants’ experiences and contextual factors impacting outcomes and implementation. Stakeholder interviews examine scale-up and implementation.Ethics and disseminationEthical approval was obtained before data collection (West of Scotland Research Ethics Service Research Ethics Committee (REC) 4 22/WS/0003). Results will be published via a range of outputs and audiences.Trial registration numberISRCTN16299220.

