# Taxonomy and ethical considerations of digital health promotion tools for youth: Selected examples from three Sub-Saharan African countries (Preprint)

**Year:** 2023  
**DOI:** 10.2196/preprints.54472  

## Abstract
<sec> <title>BACKGROUND</title> Digital technologies for health promotion have proliferated over the past decade, with uptake increasing steadily among young people, including those in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). Youth increasingly rely on digital tools for health information, and the early influence of this digital technology can have an impact throughout the lifespan. While there is a growing body of literature on the opportunities and challenges of digital health promotion (DHP) for young people, a gap remains in research that closely examines the characteristics of digital health strategies developed specifically for youth in LMICs. </sec> <sec> <title>OBJECTIVE</title> In the present paper we investigate and compare selected examples of DHP tools, from three countries in sub-Saharan Africa, namely Ghana, Kenya, and South Africa. Our aim is to create a multidimensional descriptive taxonomy of DHP tools developed specifically to promote the health of adolescents and young adults in these countries. </sec> <sec> <title>METHODS</title> We conducted systematic online searches using relevant keywords, incorporating the expertise of local professionals to ensure a thorough search. We thereafter created a taxonomy describing selected features for each tool, including health area of focus, key stakeholders, type of service, and ethical values explicitly referenced within the tool. </sec> <sec> <title>RESULTS</title> A total of 31 DHP tools were identified. Sexual and reproductive health was the most common health area of focus for DHP services, which were primarily funded and supported by local NGOs, foundations, and international organizations. The assessed tools were predominantly web and social media-based, with the overarching goal and core value of expanding health knowledge and offering access to health promotion services to young people. </sec> <sec> <title>CONCLUSIONS</title> With sustained investment, DHP can improve the health of young people while relieving the pressure on healthcare services. Addressing ethical concerns such as privacy, transparency, equity, and inclusiveness are essential to the safety, usefulness, and fairness of DHP. To achieve the greatest benefit, local youth perspectives and priorities should be included in DHP development. </sec>

