# Do physical activity interventions combining self-monitoring with other components provide an additional benefit compared with self-monitoring alone? A systematic review and meta-analysis

**Authors:** Tomas Vetrovsky, Roman Jurik, Witold Śmigielski, James J. Tufano, Karel Sýkora, Petr Stastny  
**Year:** 2022  
**Journal:** British Journal of Sports Medicine  
**Pages:** bjsports-105198  
**DOI:** 10.1136/bjsports-2021-105198  

## Abstract
Objective To determine the net effect of different physical activity intervention components on step counts in addition to self-monitoring. Design A systematic review with meta-analysis and meta-regression. Data sources Five databases (PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, ProQuest and Discus) were searched from inception to May 2022. The database search was complemented with backward and forward citation searches and search of the references from relevant systematic reviews. Eligibility criteria Randomised controlled trials comparing an intervention using self-monitoring (active control arm) with an intervention comprising the same treatment PLUS any additional component (intervention arm). Data extraction and synthesis The effect measures were mean differences in daily step count. Meta-analyses were performed using random-effects models, and effect moderators were explored using univariate and multivariate meta-regression models. Results Eighty-five studies with 12 057 participants were identified, with 75 studies included in the meta-analysis at postintervention and 24 at follow-up. At postintervention, the mean difference between the intervention and active control arms was 926 steps/day (95% CI 651 to 1201). At a follow-up, the mean difference was 413 steps/day (95% CI 210 to 615). Interventions with a prescribed goal and involving human counselling, particularly via phone/video calls, were associated with a greater mean difference in the daily step count than interventions with added print materials, websites, smartphone apps or incentives. Conclusion Physical activity interventions that combine self-monitoring with other components provide an additional modest yet sustained increase in step count compared with self-monitoring alone. Some forms of counselling, particularly remote phone/video counselling, outperformed other intervention components, such as websites and smartphone apps. PROSPERO registered number CRD42020199482.

