# Utility of Consumer-Grade Wearable Devices for Inferring Physical and Mental Health Outcomes in Severe Mental Illness: Systematic Review

**Authors:** Lamiece Hassan, Alyssa Milton, Chelsea Sawyer, Alexander J Casson, John Torous, Alan Davies, Bernalyn Ruiz-Yu, Joseph Firth  
**Year:** 2025  
**Journal:** JMIR Mental Health  
**Volume:** 12  
**Pages:** e65143  
**DOI:** 10.2196/65143  

## Abstract
Background            Digital wearable devices, worn on or close to the body, have potential for passively detecting mental and physical health symptoms among people with severe mental illness (SMI); however, the roles of consumer-grade devices are not well understood.                                Objective            This study aims to examine the utility of data from consumer-grade, digital, wearable devices (including smartphones or wrist-worn devices) for remotely monitoring or predicting changes in mental or physical health among adults with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Studies were included that passively collected physiological data (including sleep duration, heart rate, sleep and wake patterns, or physical activity) for at least 3 days. Research-grade actigraphy methods and physically obtrusive devices were excluded.                                Methods            We conducted a systematic review of the following databases: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Technology Assessment, AMED (Allied and Complementary Medicine), APA PsycINFO, Embase, MEDLINE(R), and IEEE XPlore. Searches were completed in May 2024. Results were synthesized narratively due to study heterogeneity and divided into the following phenotypes: physical activity, sleep and circadian rhythm, and heart rate.                                Results            Overall, 23 studies were included that reported data from 12 distinct studies, mostly using smartphones and centered on relapse prevention. Only 1 study explicitly aimed to address physical health outcomes among people with SMI. In total, data were included from over 500 participants with SMI, predominantly from high-income countries. Most commonly, papers presented physical activity data (n=18), followed by sleep and circadian rhythm data (n=14) and heart rate data (n=6). The use of smartwatches to support data collection were reported by 8 papers; the rest used only smartphones. There was some evidence that lower levels of activity, higher heart rates, and later and irregular sleep onset times were associated with psychiatric diagnoses or poorer symptoms. However, heterogeneity in devices, measures, sampling and statistical approaches complicated interpretation.                                Conclusions            Consumer-grade wearables show the ability to passively detect digital markers indicative of psychiatric symptoms or mental health status among people with SMI, but few are currently using these to address physical health inequalities. The digital phenotyping field in psychiatry would benefit from moving toward agreed standards regarding data descriptions and outcome measures and ensuring that valuable temporal data provided by wearables are fully exploited.                                Trial Registration            PROSPERO CRD42022382267; https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?RecordID=382267

