# Leveraging artificial intelligence to advance implementation science: potential opportunities and cautions

**Authors:** Katy E. Trinkley, Ruopeng An, Anna M. Maw, Russell E. Glasgow, Ross C. Brownson  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** Implementation Science  
**Volume:** 19  
**Issue:** 1  
**DOI:** 10.1186/s13012-024-01346-y  

## Abstract
Abstract                Background                The field of implementation science was developed to address the significant time delay between establishing an evidence-based practice and its widespread use. Although implementation science has contributed much toward bridging this gap, the evidence-to-practice chasm remains a challenge. There are some key aspects of implementation science in which advances are needed, including speed and assessing causality and mechanisms. The increasing availability of artificial intelligence applications offers opportunities to help address specific issues faced by the field of implementation science and expand its methods.                              Main text                This paper discusses the many ways artificial intelligence can address key challenges in applying implementation science methods while also considering potential pitfalls to the use of artificial intelligence. We answer the questions of “why” the field of implementation science should consider artificial intelligence, for “what” (the purpose and methods), and the “what” (consequences and challenges). We describe specific ways artificial intelligence can address implementation science challenges related to (1) speed, (2) sustainability, (3) equity, (4) generalizability, (5) assessing context and context-outcome relationships, and (6) assessing causality and mechanisms. Examples are provided from global health systems, public health, and precision health that illustrate both potential advantages and hazards of integrating artificial intelligence applications into implementation science methods. We conclude by providing recommendations and resources for implementation researchers and practitioners to leverage artificial intelligence in their work responsibly.                              Conclusions                Artificial intelligence holds promise to advance implementation science methods (“why”) and accelerate its goals of closing the evidence-to-practice gap (“purpose”). However, evaluation of artificial intelligence’s potential unintended consequences must be considered and proactively monitored. Given the technical nature of artificial intelligence applications as well as their potential impact on the field, transdisciplinary collaboration is needed and may suggest the need for a subset of implementation scientists cross-trained in both fields to ensure artificial intelligence is used optimally and ethically.

