# Implementation and Evaluation of a Text Message–Based Addiction Counseling Program (Text4Hope-Addiction Support): Protocol for a Questionnaire Study

**Authors:** Vincent Israel Opoku Agyapong, Marianne Hrabok, Wesley Vuong, April Gusnowski, Reham Shalaby, Shireen Surood, Andrew J Greenshaw, Avininder Aulakh, Adam Abba-Aji, Mohit Singh  
**Year:** 2020  
**Journal:** JMIR Research Protocols  
**Volume:** 9  
**Issue:** 11  
**Pages:** e22047  
**DOI:** 10.2196/22047  

## Abstract
Background            With the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, providing counseling to people with drug or alcohol addiction while maintaining physical distance has been challenging. This protocol describes the use of text messaging (as used in the Text4Hope-Addiction Support program) as a convenient, evidence-based, cost-effective, and accessible population-level mental health intervention with high user satisfaction proven in prior research.                                Objective            The project goal is to implement a program of daily supportive text messaging (Text4Hope-Addiction Support) to reduce drug or alcohol cravings as well as anxiety and depression, typically associated with alcohol and substance use disorders. The aim of this study is to evaluate the prevalence of cravings, anxiety, and depressive symptoms; demographic correlates of the same; and the outcomes of the Text4Hope-Addiction Support intervention in mitigating cravings, anxiety, and depressive symptoms.                                Methods            Self-administered, anonymous, online questionnaires will be used to assess cravings for the primary substance of addiction (Brief Substance Craving Scale), anxiety (Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7), and depressive symptoms (Patient Health Questionnaire-9). Data will be collected at baseline (onset of receiving text messages), program midpoint (6 weeks), and program end (12 weeks).                                Results            As of October 2020, data collection is in progress; and it is expected to be completed by fall 2021. Data analysis will include parametric and nonparametric techniques, focusing on primary outcomes (ie, cravings, anxiety, and depressive symptoms) and metrics of use, including the number of subscribers and user satisfaction.                                Conclusions            This Text4Hope-Addiction Support project will provide key information regarding the prevalence rates of cravings, anxiety, and depressive symptoms among persons with alcohol and substance use disorders; demographic correlates of cravings, anxiety, and depression; and outcome data related to this scalable population-level intervention. Information from this study will be valuable for addiction care practitioners; it will inform the policy and decision making regarding population-level addiction treatment and support during emergencies.                                International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID)            DERR1-10.2196/22047

