# Role of Tailored Timing and Frequency Prompts on the Efficacy of an Internet-Delivered Stress Recovery Intervention for Health Care Workers: Randomized Controlled Trial

**Authors:** Auguste Nomeikaite, Odeta Gelezelyte, Maria Böttche, Gerhard Andersson, Evaldas Kazlauskas  
**Year:** 2025  
**Journal:** JMIR Mental Health  
**Volume:** 12  
**Pages:** e62782  
**DOI:** 10.2196/62782  

## Abstract
Background            Prompts offer a promising strategy to promote client engagement in internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (ICBT). However, if the prompts do not meet the needs of clients, they can potentially be more obtrusive rather than helpful.                                Objective            The aim of this study was to test if prompts tailored based on timing and frequency, aligned with preintervention goal setting, can increase usage and the efficacy of a therapist-supported ICBT stress recovery intervention for health care workers.                                Methods            The 2-arm randomized controlled trial included 87 health care workers (99% female, aged 19-68 years: mean 39.61, SD 11.49): 43 in the standard intervention group and 44 in the tailored prompts group. The primary outcome measure was the Recovery Experiences Questionnaire, and the secondary outcomes were the Perceived Stress Scale-4, the Patient Health Questionnaire-4, and the World Health Organization-5 Well-Being Index. The self-report data were collected before the intervention (September 2022), postintervention (October 2022), and 6-month follow-up (May 2023).                                Results            The results showed that tailored prompts, although appreciated by the majority (39/40, 98%), did not improve intervention usage indicators, such as the number of logins (t85=–0.91; P=.36), modules opened (t83.57=–1.47; P=.15), modules completed (t85=–0.71; P=.48), exercises completed (t85=–1.05; P=.30), or the time spent using the program (χ22=1.1; P=.57). Similarly, tailored prompts did not increase the effects of the intervention in terms of stress recovery skills (Cohen d ranging from 0.31 to 0.85), perceived stress (d=–0.08; –0.70), depression (d=–0.11; –0.38), anxiety (d=–0.32; –0.64), or psychological well-being (d=0.26; 0.46). In addition, the standard intervention group showed greater long-term stress recovery effects than the group using the internet-delivered intervention supplemented by tailored prompts (β=–0.24, P=.03).                                Conclusions            Although the study confirmed the efficacy of the program, the merits of tailored prompts in ICBT for stress recovery were not supported. Future research is needed to test the effects of the stress recovery intervention supplemented by goal setting and tailored prompts.                                Trial Registration            ClinicalTrials.gov NCT05553210; https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT05553210

