# The Growing Impact of Natural Language Processing in Healthcare and Public Health

**Authors:** Aadit Jerfy, Owen Selden, Rajesh Balkrishnan  
**Year:** None  
**Journal:** INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing  
**Volume:** 61  
**Pages:** 00469580241290095  
**DOI:** 10.1177/00469580241290095  

## Abstract
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a subset of Artificial Intelligence, specifically focused on understanding and generating human language. NLP technologies are becoming more prevalent in healthcare and hold potential solutions to current problems. Some examples of existing and future uses include: public sentiment analysis in relation to health policies, electronic health record (EHR) screening, use of speech to text technology for extracting EHR data from point of care, patient communications, accelerated identification of eligible clinical trial candidates through automated searches and access of health data to assist in informed treatment decisions. This narrative review aims to summarize the current uses of NLP in healthcare, highlight successful implementation of computational linguistics-based approaches, and identify gaps, limitations, and emerging trends within the subfield of NLP in public health. The online databases Google Scholar and PubMed were scanned for papers published between 2018 and 2023. Keywords “Natural Language Processing, Health Policy, Large Language Models” were utilized in the initial search. Then, papers were limited to those written in English. Each of the 27 selected papers was subject to careful analysis, and their relevance in relation to NLP and healthcare respectively is utilized in this review. NLP and deep learning technologies scan large datasets, extracting valuable insights in various realms. This is especially significant in healthcare where huge amounts of data exist in the form of unstructured text. Automating labor intensive and tedious tasks with language processing algorithms, using text analytics systems and machine learning to analyze social media data and extracting insights from unstructured data allows for better public sentiment analysis, enhancement of risk prediction models, improved patient communication, and informed treatment decisions. In the recent past, some studies have applied NLP tools to social media posts to evaluate public sentiment regarding COVID-19 vaccine use. Social media data also has the capacity to be harnessed to develop pandemic prediction models based on reported symptoms. Furthermore, NLP has the potential to enhance healthcare delivery across the globe. Advanced language processing techniques such as Speech Recognition (SR) and Natural Language Understanding (NLU) tools can help overcome linguistic barriers and facilitate efficient communication between patients and healthcare providers.

