# Investigating eHealth Lifestyle Interventions for Vulnerable Pregnant Women: Scoping Review of Facilitators and Barriers

**Authors:** Ashley Jp Smit, Isra Al-Dhahir, Lieke Schiphof-Godart, Linda D Breeman, Andrea Wm Evers, Koen Fm Joosten  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** Journal of Medical Internet Research  
**Volume:** 26  
**Pages:** e54366  
**DOI:** 10.2196/54366  

## Abstract
Background: The maintenance of a healthy lifestyle significantly influences pregnancy outcomes. Certain pregnant women are more at risk of engaging in unhealthy behaviors due to factors such as having a low socioeconomic position and low social capital. eHealth interventions tailored to pregnant women affected by these vulnerability factors can provide support and motivation for healthier choices. However, there is still a lack of insight into how interventions for this target group are best designed, used, and implemented and how vulnerable pregnant women are best reached.
Objective: This review aimed to identify the strategies used in the design, reach, use, and implementation phases of eHealth lifestyle interventions for vulnerable pregnant women; assess whether these strategies acted as facilitators; and identify barriers that were encountered.
Methods: We conducted a search on MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, CINAHL, and Google Scholar for studies that described an eHealth intervention for vulnerable pregnant women focusing on at least one lifestyle component (diet, physical activity, alcohol consumption, smoking, stress, or sleep) and provided information on the design, reach, use, or implementation of the intervention.
Results: The literature search identified 3904 records, of which 29 (0.74%) met our inclusion criteria. These 29 articles described 20 eHealth lifestyle interventions, which were primarily delivered through apps and frequently targeted multiple lifestyle components simultaneously. Barriers identified in the design and use phases included financial aspects (eg, budgetary constraints) and technological challenges for the target group (eg, limited internet connectivity). In addition, barriers were encountered in reaching vulnerable pregnant women, including a lack of interest and time constraints among eligible participants and limited support from health care providers. Facilitators identified in the design and use phases included collaborating with the target group and other stakeholders (eg, health care providers), leveraging existing eHealth platforms for modifications or extensions, and adhering to clinical and best practice guidelines and behavior change frameworks. Furthermore, tailoring (eg, matching the content of the intervention to the target groups’ norms and values) and the use of incentives (eg, payments for abstaining from unhealthy behavior) were identified as potential facilitators to eHealth use. Facilitators in the interventions’ reach and implementation phases included stakeholder collaboration and a low workload for the intervention deliverers involved in these phases.
Conclusions: This scoping review offers a comprehensive overview of strategies used in different phases of eHealth lifestyle interventions for vulnerable pregnant women, highlighting specific barriers and facilitators. Limited reporting on the impact of the strategies used and barriers encountered hinders a complete identification of facilitators and barriers. Nevertheless, this review

