# Critical activities for successful implementation and adoption of AI in healthcare: towards a process framework for healthcare organizations

**Authors:** Monika Nair, Jens Nygren, Per Nilsen, Fabio Gama, Margit Neher, Ingrid Larsson, Petra Svedberg  
**Year:** 2025  
**Journal:** Frontiers in Digital Health  
**Volume:** 7  
**DOI:** 10.3389/fdgth.2025.1550459  

## Abstract
IntroductionAbsence of structured guidelines to navigate the complexities of implementing AI-based applications in healthcare is recognized by clinicians, healthcare leaders, and policy makers. AI implementation presents challenges beyond the technology development which necessitates standardized approaches to implementation. This study aims to explore the activities typical to implementation of AI-based systems to develop an AI implementation process framework intended to guide healthcare professionals. The Quality Implementation Framework (QIF) was considered as an initial reference framework.MethodsThis study employed a qualitative research design and included three components: (1) a review of 30 scientific articles describing differences empirical cases of real-world AI implementation in healthcare, (2) analysis of qualitative interviews with healthcare representatives possessing first-hand experience in planning, running, and sustaining AI implementation projects, (3) analysis of qualitative interviews with members of the research group´s network and purposively sampled for their AI literacy and academic, technical or managerial leadership roles.ResultsThe data were deductively mapped onto the steps of QIF using direct qualitative content analysis. All the phases and steps in QIF are relevant to AI implementation in healthcare, but there are specificities in the context of AI that require incorporation of additional activities and phases. To effectively support the AI implementations, the process frameworks should include a dedicated phase to implementation with specific activities that occur after planning, ensuring a smooth transition from AI's design to deployment, and a phase focused on governance and sustainability, aimed at maintaining the AI's long-term impact. The component of continuous engagement of diverse stakeholders should be incorporated throughout the lifecycle of the AI implementation.ConclusionThe value of this study is the identified processual phases and activities specific and typical to AI implementations to be carried out by an adopting healthcare organization when AI systems are deployed. The study advances previous research by outlining the types of necessary comprehensive assessments and legal preparations located in the implementation planning phase. It also extends prior understanding of what the staff's training should focus on throughout different phases of implementation. Finally, the overall processual, phased structure is discussed in order to incorporate activities that lead to a successful deployment of AI systems in healthcare.

