# Digital Health Interventions to Enhance Tuberculosis Treatment Adherence: Scoping Review

**Authors:** Sol Lee, Vasuki Rajaguru, Joon Sang Baek, Jaeyong Shin, Youngmok Park  
**Year:** 2023  
**Journal:** JMIR mHealth and uHealth  
**Volume:** 11  
**Pages:** e49741-e49741  
**DOI:** 10.2196/49741  

## Abstract
Abstract                      Background            Digital health technologies are widely used for disease management, with their computing platforms, software, and sensors being used for health care. These technologies are developed to manage chronic diseases and infectious bacterial diseases, including tuberculosis (TB).                                Objective            This study aims to comprehensively review the literature on the use of digital health interventions (DHIs) for enhancing TB treatment adherence and identify major strategies for their adoption.                                Methods            We conducted a literature search in the PubMed, Cochrane Library, Ovid Embase, and Scopus databases for relevant studies published between January 2012 and March 2022. Studies that focused on web-based or mobile phone–based interventions, medication adherence, digital health, randomized controlled trials, digital interventions, or mobile health and ubiquitous health technology for TB treatment and related health outcomes were included.                                Results            We identified 27 relevant studies and classified them according to the intervention method, a significant difference in treatment success, and health outcomes. The following interventions were emphasized: SMS text messaging interventions (8/27, 30%), medicine reminders (6/27, 22%), and web-based direct observation therapy (9/27, 33%). Digital health technology significantly promoted disease management among individuals and health care professionals. However, only a few studies addressed 2-way communication therapies, such as interactive SMS text messaging and feedback systems.                                Conclusions            This scoping review classified studies on DHIs for patients with TB and demonstrated their potential for the self-management of TB. DHIs are still being developed, and evidence on the impact of digital technologies on enhancing TB treatment adherence remains limited. However, it is necessary to encourage patients’ participation in TB treatment and self-management through bidirectional communication. We emphasize the importance of developing a communication system.

