# The role of text messaging intervention in Inner Mongolia among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial

**Authors:** Xuemei Wang, Dan Liu, Maolin Du, Ruiqi Hao, Huiqiu Zheng, Chaoli Yan  
**Year:** None  
**Journal:** BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making  
**Volume:** 20  
**Issue:** 1  
**DOI:** 10.1186/s12911-020-01129-7  

## Abstract
AbstractBackgroundShort messages service (SMS) provides a practical medium for delivering content to address patients to adherence to self-management. The aim of study was to design some patient-centered health education messages, evaluate the feasibility of messages, and explore the effect of this model.MethodsThe messages were designed by a panel of experts, and SMS Quality Evaluation Questionnaire was used to evaluate their quality. A two-arm randomized controlled trial was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of this management model. Participants were randomly divided into an intervention group (IG) who received evaluated messages and a control group (CG) who received regular education. The primary outcomes were changes in plasma glucose and control rates, and the secondary outcomes were improvements in diet control, physical activities, weight control, etc.ResultsA total of 42 messages covering five main domains: health awareness, diet control, physical activities, living habits and weight control were designed, and the average scores of the messages were 8.0 (SD 0.7), 8.5 (SD 0.6), 7.9 (SD 1.0), 8.0 (SD 0.7), and 8.4 (SD 0.9), respectively. In the SMS intervention, 171 patients with an average age of 55.1 years were involved, including 86 in the CG and 85 in the IG. At 12 months, compared with the control group (CG), the decrease of fasting plasma glucose (FPG) (1.5 vs. 0.4, P = 0.011) and control rate (49.4% vs. 33.3%, P = 0.034), the postprandial glucose (PPG) (5.8 vs. 4.2, P = 0.009) and control rate (57.8% vs. 33.7%, P = 0.002) were better in the intervention group (IG). In terms of self-management, improvements in weight control (49.3% vs. 28.2%, P = 0.031), vegetables consumption (87.3% vs. 29.0%, P < 0.001), fruits consumption (27.5% vs. 7.4%, P = 0.022), and physical activities (84.7% vs. 70.0%, P = 0.036) were better in the IG than in the CG.ConclusionsThe overall quality of the messages was high. It was effective and feasible to carry out an SMS intervention to improve the behavioral habits of patients with chronic diseases in remote and undeveloped areas.Trial registrationClinicaltrials.gov, ChiCTR1900023445. Registered May 28, 2019--Retrospectively registered.

