# An Enhanced SMS Text Message–Based Support and Reminder Program for Young Adults With Type 2 Diabetes (TEXT2U): Randomized Controlled Trial

**Authors:** Timothy Middleton, Maria Constantino, Margaret McGill, Mario D'Souza, Stephen M Twigg, Ted Wu, Aravinda Thiagalingam, Clara Chow, Jencia Wong  
**Year:** 2021  
**Journal:** Journal of Medical Internet Research  
**Volume:** 23  
**Issue:** 10  
**Pages:** e27263  
**DOI:** 10.2196/27263  

## Abstract
Background            Clinic attendance, metabolic control, engagement in self-management, and psychological health are suboptimal in young-onset (age of onset <40 years) type 2 diabetes.                                Objective            We examined the effectiveness of an enhanced SMS text message–based support and reminder program in improving clinic attendance, metabolic control, engagement in self-management, and psychological health in young-onset type 2 diabetes.                                Methods            A 12-month, parallel-arm, randomized controlled trial comparing an enhanced, semipersonalized SMS text message–based intervention (incorporating 1-8 supportive and/or informative text messages per month) against standard care was conducted in a specialized clinic for young adult type 2 diabetes. The primary outcome was maintenance of 100% attendance at scheduled quarterly clinical appointments. Secondary outcomes included (1) metabolic indices, (2) pathology and self-monitored blood glucose (SMBG) data availability, and (3) psychosocial well-being.                                Results            A total of 40 participants were randomized, and 32 completed their 12-month study visit. The average participant age was 32.7 (SD 5.1) years, 50% (20/40) were male, and baseline glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 7.3% (SD 1.9%) (56 mmol/mol, SD 20). A higher proportion of the intervention group achieved 100% attendance (12/21, 57%, vs 5/19, 26%, for the control group); Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated significantly greater cumulative attendance in the intervention group (P=.04). There were no between-group differences in HbA1c, BMI, lipids, or availability of pathology and SMBG data. Odds of recording an improvement in the Diabetes Empowerment Scale–Short Form score were higher in the intervention group at 6 months (odds ratio [OR] 4.3, 95% CI 1.1-17), with attenuation of this effect at study end (OR 3.1, 95% CI 0.9-11). Program acceptability was high; >90% of participants would recommend the program to new patients.                                Conclusions            An enhanced SMS text message–based support and reminder program doubled scheduled clinic attendance rates for patients with young-onset type 2 diabetes. The program was highly acceptable and provided early support for patient empowerment but had no significant effect on measures of metabolic control or self-management.                                Trial Registration            Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ACTRN12618000479202); https://www.anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?id=373579

