# SMS messaging to improve retention and viral suppression in prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission (PMTCT) programs in Kenya: A 3-arm randomized clinical trial

**Authors:** John Kinuthia, Keshet Ronen, Jennifer A. Unger, Wenwen Jiang, Daniel Matemo, Trevor Perrier, Lusi Osborn, Bhavna H. Chohan, Alison L. Drake, Barbra A. Richardson, Grace John-Stewart, Edward J. Mills  
**Year:** 2021  
**Journal:** PLOS Medicine  
**Volume:** 18  
**Issue:** 5  
**Pages:** e1003650  
**DOI:** 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003650  

## Abstract
BackgroundPregnant and postpartum women living with HIV (WLWH) need support for HIV and maternal child health (MCH) care, which could be provided using short message service (SMS).Methods and findingsWe compared 2-way (interactive) and 1-way SMS messaging to no SMS in a 3-arm randomized trial in 6 MCH clinics in Kenya. Messages were developed using the Health Belief Model and Social Cognitive Theory; HIV messages were integrated into an existing MCH SMS platform. Intervention participants received visit reminders and prespecified weekly SMS on antiretroviral therapy (ART) adherence and MCH, tailored to their characteristics and timing. Two-way participants could message nurses as needed. Clinic attendance, viral load (VL), and infant HIV results were abstracted from program records. Primary outcomes were viral nonsuppression (VL ≥1,000 c/ml), on-time clinic attendance, loss to follow-up from clinical care, and infant HIV-free survival. Among 824 pregnant women randomized between November 2015 and May 2017, median age was 27 years, gestational age was 24.3 weeks, and time since initiation of ART was 1.0 year. During follow-up to 2 years postpartum, 9.8% of 3,150 VL assessments and 19.6% of women were ever nonsuppressed, with no significant difference in 1-way versus control (11.2% versus 9.6%, adjusted risk ratio (aRR) 1.02 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.67 to 1.54], p = 0.94) or 2-way versus control (8.5% versus 9.6%, aRR 0.80 [95% CI 0.52 to 1.23], p = 0.31). Median ART adherence and incident ART resistance did not significantly differ by arm. Overall, 88.9% (95% CI 76.5 to 95.7) of visits were on time, with no significant differences between arms (88.2% in control versus 88.6% in 1-way and 88.8% in 2-way). Incidence of infant HIV or death was 3.01/100 person-years (py), with no significant difference between arms; risk of infant HIV infection was 0.94%. Time to postpartum contraception was significantly shorter in the 2-way arm than control. Study limitations include limited ability to detect improvement due to high viral suppression and visit attendance and imperfect synchronization of SMS reminders to clinic visits.ConclusionsIntegrated HIV/MCH messaging did not improve HIV outcomes but was associated with improved initiation of postpartum contraception. In programs where most women are virally suppressed, targeted SMS informed by VL data may improve effectiveness. Rigorous evaluation remains important to optimize mobile health (mHealth) interventions.Trial registrationClinicalTrials.gov number NCT02400671.

