# Impact of a telerehabilitation programme combined with continuous positive airway pressure on symptoms and cardiometabolic risk factors in obstructive sleep apnea patients

**Authors:** François Bughin, Monique Mendelson, Dany Jaffuel, Jean-Louis Pépin, Frédéric Gagnadoux, Frédéric Goutorbe, Beatriz Abril, Bronia Ayoub, Alexandre Aranda, Khuder Alagha, Pascal Pomiès, François Roubille, Jacques Mercier, Nicolas Molinari, Yves Dauvilliers, Nelly Héraud, M Hayot  
**Year:** None  
**Journal:** DIGITAL HEALTH  
**Volume:** 9  
**DOI:** 10.1177/20552076231167009  

## Abstract
Background Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is a common sleep-breathing disorder associated with adverse health outcomes including excessive daytime sleepiness, impaired quality of life and is well-established as a cardiovascular risk factor. Continuous positive airway pressure is the reference treatment, but its cardiovascular and metabolic benefits are still debated. Combined interventions aiming at improving patient's lifestyle behaviours are recommended in guidelines management of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome but adherence decreases over time and access to rehabilitation programmes is limited. Telerehabilitation is a promising approach to address these issues, but data are scarce on obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Methods The aim of this study is to assess the potential benefits of a telerehabilitation programme implemented at continuous positive airway pressure initiation, compared to continuous positive airway pressure alone and usual care, on symptoms and cardiometabolic risk factors of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. This study is a 6-months multicentre randomized, parallel controlled trial during which 180 obese patients with severe obstructive sleep apnea syndrome will be included. We will use a sequential hierarchical criterion for major endpoints including sleepiness, quality of life, nocturnal systolic blood pressure and inflammation biological parameters. Discussion m-Rehab obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is the first multicentre randomized controlled trial to examine the effectiveness of a telerehabilitation lifestyle programme in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. We hypothesize that a telerehabilitation lifestyle intervention associated with continuous positive airway pressure for 6 months will be more efficient than continuous positive airway pressure alone on symptoms, quality of life and cardiometabolic risk profile. Main secondary outcomes include continuous positive airway pressure adherence, usability and satisfaction with the telerehabilitation platform and medico-economic evaluation. Trial registration Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT05049928. Registration data: 20 September 2021

