# Digital Twins and the Emerging Science of Self: Implications for Digital Health Experience Design and “Small” Data

**Authors:** Steven M. Schwartz, Kevin Wildenhaus, Amy Bucher, Brigid Byrd  
**Year:** 2020  
**Journal:** Frontiers in Computer Science  
**Volume:** 2  
**Pages:** 31  
**DOI:** 10.3389/fcomp.2020.00031  

## Abstract
The technology currently available for quantifying various biometric, behavioral, emotional, cognitive, and psychological aspects of daily life has become increasingly diverse, accurate, and accessible as a result of ongoing and continuous improvements. These burgeoning technologies can and will profoundly alter the way lifestyle, health, wellness, and chronic diseases are managed in the future. For those pursuing the potential of such digital technologies in the creation of a compelling and effective connected healthcare experience, a number of new concepts have surfaced. We have taken these concepts (many of which originate in engineering) and extended them so they can be incorporated into managing health risk and health conditions via a blended digital health experience. For example, the advent of mobile technology for health has given rise to concepts, such as ecological momentary assessment and ecological momentary intervention that assess the person’s (digital twin) status and delivers interventions as needed, when needed—perhaps even preemptively. For such concepts to be fully realized, the experience design of mobile health (mHealth) program(s) (aka connected care) should and now can actually guide end users through a series of self-experiments directed by data-driven feedback from a version of their digital twin. As treatment development and testing move toward the precision of individual differences inherent in every person and every treatment response (or non-response), group data and more recent big data approaches for generating new knowledge offer limited help to end users (including practitioners) for helping individuals evaluate their own digital twin–generated data and change over time under different conditions. This is the renaissance of N-of-1 or individual science. N-of-1 evaluation creates the opportunity to evaluate each individual uniquely. The rigor and logic of N-of-1 designs have been well articulated and expanded upon for over a half century. For the clinician, this revitalized form of scientiﬁc and behavioral interaction evaluation can help validate or reject the impact a given treatment has for a given patient with increased efﬁciency and accuracy. Further, N-of-1 can incorporate biological (genomic), behavioral, psychological, and digital health data such that users themselves can begin to evaluate the relationships of their own treatment response patterns and the contingencies that impact them. Thus, emerges the self-scientist.

