# Effectiveness of mobile application interventions for stroke survivors: systematic review and meta-analysis

**Authors:** Wenjing Cao, Azidah Abdul Kadir, Wenzhen Tang, Juan Wang, Jiamu Yuan, Intan Idiana Hassan  
**Year:** 2024  
**Journal:** BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making  
**Volume:** 24  
**Issue:** 1  
**DOI:** 10.1186/s12911-023-02391-1  

## Abstract
Abstract                Background                Although smartphone usage is ubiquitous, and a vast amount of mobile applications have been developed for chronic diseases, mobile applications amongst stroke survivors remain unclear.                              Objective                This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to determine the effectiveness of mobile applications on medication adherence, functional outcomes, cardiovascular risk factors, quality of life and knowledge on stroke in stroke survivors.                              Methods                A review of the literature was conducted using key search terms in PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane and Web of Science databases until 16 March 2023 to identify eligible randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or controlled clinical trial (CCTs) of mobile application interventions among stroke survivors. Two reviewers independently screened the literature in accordance with the eligibility criteria and collected data from the articles included. Outcomes included medication adherence,functional outcomes,cardiovascular risk factors, quality of life,and knowledge of stroke.                              Results                Twenty-three studies involving 2983 participants across nine countries were included in this review. Sixteen trials involved health care professionals in app use, and seven trials reported measures to ensure app-based intervention adherence. Mobile applications targeting stroke survivors primarily encompassed three areas: rehabilitation, education and self-care. The participants in the studies primarily included young and middle-aged stroke survivors. Meta-analysis results demonstrated that mobile application intervention significantly improved trunk control ability (mean differences [MD] 3.00, 95% CI [1.80 to 4.20]; P < 0.00001), Fugl–Meyer assessment of upper extremity (MD 9.81, 95% CI [8.72 to 10.90]; P < 0.00001), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (MD − 0.33, 95% CI [− 0.54 to − 0.11]; P = 0.003) and glycosylated haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)<7 levels (MD 1.95, 95% CI [1.17 to 3.25]; P = 0.01). However, the mobile application intervention did not differ significantly in medication adherence, 10-min walk test (10 MWT), Barthel index, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, body mass index, smoking, health-related quality of life and knowledge of stroke.                              Conclusion                Our study suggested that mobile application interventions may have a potential benefit to stroke survivors, but clinical effectiveness should be established. More studies using rigorous designs are warranted to understand their usefulness. Future research should also involve more older adult stroke survivors.

